---
slideOptions:
  transition: slide
  spotlight:
    enabled: true
---

# Fairness (Section 3): Statistical Fairness

> **Note**
> The following sections are part of this module:
>
> - Section 1: [What is Fairness?](rri-203-1.md)
> - Section 2: [Sociocultural Fairness](rri-203-2.md)
> - Section 3: [Statistical Fairness](rri-203-3.md)
> - Section 4: [Practical Fairness](rri-203-4.md)

---

## The Computational Allure of Statistical Fairness

Humans have tried to quantify fairness for centuries.
The Law of Hammurabi, for exmaple, states that if a man "destroy's the eye of a man's slave or beaks a bone of a man's slave, he shall pay one-half his price".[^practicalfairness]
We rightfully recoil at the idea of such a law being espoused and adhered to in modern society.
However, the idea that we can quantify fairness is still very much alive, and still not without its problems.

Fairness in ML and AI has seen enormous interest over the last decade, as many researchers and developers try to bring conceptual and pragmatic order to a vast and complex landscape of statistical methods and measures.
This is understandable.
Statistical measures are, typically, well-defined and bring a quantitative dimension to the discussion of fairness.

Attempting to translate fairness into a statistical problem, therefore, has a certain allure because it suggests that if we can get the right measure or formula we can "solve" the problem of fairness in an objective manner.
However, the allure of this statistical or computational approach needs to be properly seen for what it is—an important tool, but one that has many limitations and needs to be used responsibly [^allure].
This section is about understanding both the strengths and limitations of statistical fairness.

----

As a simple example of one limitation to get us started, consider the following question:

> Is it fair for a company to build an AI system that monitors the performance of employees in a factory and automatically notifies them when they are not meeting their targets? Or, should the company instead invest in better training and support for employees and work with their staff to understand obstacles or barriers?

----

As you can probably guess, based on the questions posed in the [first section](rri-203-1.md) of this moduel, there is no easy answer to this question.
In fact, you may have realised that a lot depends on factors that are not appropriately specified in the question (e.g. what happens if the staff continue to miss targets, who is this company, and who are their staff?).
However, putting aside these unspecified factors, it should be evident that such a question cannot be reduced solely to a *statistical problem*.

<!-- insert admonition -->
**Problem Formulation**
This issue is a key motivator for the dual perspectives required by the `Problem Formulation` stage in our [project lifecycle](rri-101.1.md) model.
<!-- end admonition -->

Here, judging the fairness of the company's actions would require a more holistic approach, one that takes into account the social and cultural context of the company and its staff when defining the problem.
Within this more holistic approach, statistical fairness could be one tool that is used to help inform the discussion, but it will not be the only tool.

<!-- venn diagram graphic that shows how statistical problems are a subset of the more holistic sociotechnical problems??? -->

Therefore, in this section we will take a critical look at some proposed statistical concepts and techniques for understanding fairness in ML and AI, paying close attention to how they can contribute to the discussion of fairness, and where they fall short.

---

## Fairness in Classification Tasks

The area of ML and AI that has seen the most attention, with respect to fairness, is the task of classification.

In a classification task, the goal is to predict which class a given input belongs to.
This high-level description can be applied to a wide range of tasks, including:

1. Which object is depicted in an image?
2. Is an applicant likely to default on a loan?
3. Is a post on social media an instance of hate speech?
4. Will this patient be readmitted to hospital within 30 days?

<!-- begin comprehension question, collapsible -->
**Types of Classification Task**
These four questions are all instances of classification tasks, but some are instances of binary classification (e.g. yes or no answers) and others are multi-class problems (e.g. which of several classes does an instance or obejct belong to?).

Do you know which of the four tasks are which?

Answers:

1. Mutli-class: there are many objects that could be present in an image (e.g. cup, book, cat, dog).
2. Binary: an applicant will either default on a loan or not within the specified time to pay back the loan
3. Binary: a post either contains hate speech or it does not
4. Binary/Multi-Class: this question appears to be a binary problem as it is currently framed, but could easily become a multi-class problem if we add further buckets (e.g. 5 days, 10 days, 20 days, 30 days). 

There are also further complications with some of the other questions.
For instance, although the problem for (3) is binary, much depends on how 'hate speech' is defined and operationalised.
In the statistical space of the problem, there is a 'yes' or 'no' answer, but this abstraction screens off a lot of nuance and disagreement that exists at the social level where such clearly defined boundaries are unlikely to exist. 

<!-- end comprehesnion question -->

----

In this section, we are going to follow this approach and build up our knowledge of statistical fairness by using a simple binary classification task as a running example.

This simplification has a cost and a benefit:

- **Cost**: we will not be able to capture the full complexity of statistical fairness in ML and AI, such as exploring all relevant metrics, or different types of problems (e.g. multi-class classification, non-classification tasks, etc.)
- **Benefit**: we will be able to focus more closely on key concepts and ideas and link them to ethical and social issues of fairness.

With these caveats in mind, let's dive in.

---

### Classifying Patients: A Running Example

First of all, let's introduce our classification task.

We're going to pretend that we are a project team developing a classification model, using supervised learning, which will try to predict whether a patient has a disease or not based on a set of features.
We're not going to worry about what this disease may be or what the features are that we are using to train the model—our first oversimplification.
Instead, let's just assume we have a sample of 100 patients and 2 of them have the disease.

<!-- show and label graphic of 100 people with two coloured differently -->

----

#### Statistical Fairness Issue #1: Class Imbalance and Accuracy

When designing this model we may decide that evaluating the performance of this model is best achieved by measuring its accuracy.

However, this is where we come to our first problem that statistical fairness has to address: class imbalance.

In our sample of 100 patients, only 2 of them have the disease.
These two patients represent our `positive class`.

<!-- begin admonition -->
**Positive Classes**

In ML classification, the term 'positive class' is used to refer to the class that we want to identify or predict.
For example, in a medical diagnosis task, the positive class might represent the presence of a particular disease, while the negative class represents its absence.

This can sometimes cause confusion, as the term 'positive' is often used to refer to something that is good or desirable, but in some tasks the identification of the positive class may be related to an undesirable or negative outcome.

<!-- end admonition -->

----

Because of this imbalance between our two classes, if we were to build an (admittedly terrible) model that always predicted that a patient does not have the disease (i.e. classifies all patients as belonging to the `negative class`), then the model would have an overall accuracy of 98%.
From one (very limited) perspective, the model would be performing very well, but we obviously know that this is not the case.

When we have imbalanced classes (i.e. a small number of positive examples), which is quite common, such a simplistic notion of accuracy is not going to be sufficient.

----

Fortunately, there is a well-understood approach to dealing with this initial limited notion of accuracy: a confusion matrix of additional performance metrics.

A confusion matrix is a table that helps us to visualise the performance of a classification model by showing where it is doing well and what errors it is making.
The table below shows a typical confusion matrix, where the rows represent the predicted label (i.e. the model's prediction) and the columns represent the ground truth (i.e. the actual state of the world).

| | Predicted Positive | Predictive Negative |
| --- | --- | --- |
| **Actual Positive** | True Positive (TP) | False Negative (FN) |
| **Actual Negative** | False Positive (FP) | True Negative (TN) |

<!-- begin admonition -->
**Different Terminology**

Depending on your background, you may know some of the terms in this section by different names.
For example, 'False Positive' is sometimes referred to as a 'Type I Error', and 'False Negative' is sometimes referred to as a 'Type II Error'.

This will also hold true for terms we define later in the section.
This is unavoidable in such a multi-disciplinary context, although it is acknowledged that this can be confusing.
Therefore, you may need to refer to this section more frequently than other sections.

<!-- end admonition -->

----

Let's translate this general table into our running example.

Here, the positive class is the presence of the disease, while the negative class is the absence of the disease.
Therefore, the four cells would correspond to the following:

- True Positive (TP): The model correctly predicts (T) that the patient has the disease (P).
- False Positive (FP): The model incorrectly predicts (F) that the patient has the disease (P) when they do not.
- False Negative (FN): The model incorrectly predicts (F) that they do not have the disease (N) when they do.
- True Negative (TN): The model correctly predicts (T) that the patient does not have the disease (N).

<!-- combine Jonny's illustration with above list-->

<!-- begin admonition -->
**Prediction and Reality**
It is common to distinguish between the class predicted by the model and the actual state of affairs by using the following formal convention:

- $Y$: the actual value (e.g. presence of disease)
- $\hat{Y}$: the predicted value (e.g. prediction of disease)

Here, $Y$ and $\hat{Y}$ take the values $1$ or $0$ depending on whether the patient has (or is predicted to have) the disease ($1$) or not ($0$) respectively.

----

We can also represent this visually based on how our model performs with respect to the original dataset.
Let's return to our original 100 patients, but this time let's make the disease a bit more prevalent (30/100 patients have the disease now), and let's see how well our model does at predicting the disease this time around.

<!-- show the infographic where 30 patients have the disease and the following distribution of positives and negatives

- TP: 25
- FP: 5
- FN: 5
- TN: 65

 -->

This graphic allows us to see where our model has classified positive and negative instances correctly and incorrectly—we won't worry about the proportions of true and false positives and negatives for now.
This approach also allows us to use the initial four variables to define additional metrics that can help us to understand the performance of our model.

----

Let's define some key terms, all of which are based on the original confusion matrix:

| Name | Label | Definition | Formal Definition |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Actual Positives | `P` | The number of data points in the positive class, regardless of whether they were predicted correctly or incorrectly. | `P` = `TP` + `FN` |
| Actual Negatives | `N` | The number of data points in the negative class, regardless of whether they were predicted correctly or incorrectly. | `P` = `TP` + `FN` |
| Accuracy | `ACC` | The proportion of data points that were correctly predicted from the entire dataset. | `ACC` = (`TP` + `TN`) / (`P` + `N`) |
| Precision (or Positive Predictive Value) | `Precision` or `PPV` | The proportion of data points that were predicted to be in the positive class that were actually in the positive class. | `PPV` = `TP` / (`TP` + `FP`) |
| Recall (or True Positive Rate, or Sensitivity) | `Recall` or `TPR` | The proportion of data points in the positive class that were correctly predicted. | `TPR` = `TP` / `P` |
| False Positive Rate | `FPR` | The proportion of data points in the negative class that were incorrectly predicted. | `FPR` = `FP` / `N` |

*Table 1: A partial list of performance metrics*

----

<!-- begin admonition collapsible -->
**List of Metrics**

There are many more performance metrics that can be extracted from a confusion matrix.
We focus on the above ones simply because they are the ones needed for understanding some of the key concepts we discuss later on in this section.
 
The following table from (Ruf and Detyniecki, 2019)[^ruf] is a helpful reference for the most common metrics, and their paper is also an excellent resource in general.

<!-- add image of table of metrics -->

<!-- end admonition -->

----

We have already looked at the first three terms from Table 1.
Let's now look at `Precision` and `Recall`.

These two terms are often introduced in tandem because of how they relate to each other.
To get a general understanding of the two terms, consider the following image.

<!-- insert fishing image -->

Here, the objective of the two fishing boats is to catch as many fish as possible.
We can think of catching a fish as our *positive class*.

The "model" used by the boat on the left (i.e. the fishing rod) is very precise—it catches some of the fish (i.e. true positives), but not all of them, and it does not produce a lot of by-catch (e.g. false positives).

The "model" used by the boat on the right, however, has good recall—it catches all of the fish (i.e. true positives), but it also produces a lot of by-catch in the process (e.g. false positives).

This analogy is useful because it allows us to understand the trade-off between precision and recall.
As we raise the classifier's boundary (i.e. increase the size of the net), we will increase the number of true positives for our model (or minimise the number of false negatives).
However, in doing so, we will also increase the number of false positives.

But, if we lower the boundary (i.e. decrease the size of the net), we return to a situation where we have a higher number of false negatives but a lower number of false positives.

This is known as the **precision-recall trade-off**, and it brings us to our next statistical fairness issue.

#### Statistical Fairness Issue #2: The Precision-Recall Trade-off

This issue of where to "draw" the boundary for our classifier is a common one in machine learning, and the choice is in part a value-laden one.
Both precision and recall are trying to maximise the number of true positives, but they also try to combine this objective with the further goal of minimising the number of false positives and false negatives, respectively.

| Metric    | Measures           | What it Optimises |
|-----------|--------------------|-------------------|
| Precision | TP / (TP + FP)     | Lower Rate of False Positives |
| Recall    | TP / (TP + FN)     | Lower Rate of False Negatives |

Another way to frame the intuition here is that `precision` is not as concerned with a higher number of false negatives, whereas `recall` is not as concerned with a higher number of false positives.

But, this translates into very different scenarios in the real world.

In our running example, a model with high `precision` will result in a higher rate of false negatives, which means that some patients may not receive treatment when they need it.
In contrast, a model with high `recall` will capture more of these patients but some patients who do not need to be sent for further tests may have their time wasted and receive unsettling news.

In general, therefore, a high recall value is typically preferred because we generally deem the harm caused by a false positive to be less than the harm caused by a false negative.
But this is not always the case—"recall" our example of the fishing boat, where minimising the amount of bycatch may be more important to ensure sustainable fishing practices.

----

The following quotation is helpful in understanding this trade-off:

> "A general rule is that when the consequences of a positive prediction have a negative, punitive impact on the individual, the emphasis with respect to fairness often is on precision. When the result is rather beneficial in the sense that the individuals are provided help they would otherwise forgo, fairness is often more sensitive to recall."
> -- Ruf and Detyniecki (2021)

----

<!-- begin admonition -->
**F0.5, F1, and F2 Scores**

In machine learning, there is another approach to measuring accuracy that combines precision and recall into a single metric, known as the `F1` score.
The `F1` score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall, and is defined formally as follows:

$$
F1 = 2 \times \frac{Precision \times Recall}{Precision + Recall}
$$

A high F1 score means that the model has both high precision and high recall, and it balances the contribution of these two metrics such that they have equal weight.

However, as we have already seen, there are many real-world applications where precision or recall may be more important goals.
In such cases, there are two variants of the F1 score that place different levels of emphasis on precision and recall: the F0.5 score (which favours precision), and the F2 score (which favours recall):

$$
F0.5 = (1 + 0.5^2) \times \frac{Precision \times Recall}{0.5^2 \times Precision + Recall}
$$

$$
F2 = (1 + 2^2) \times \frac{Precision \times Recall}{2^2 \times Precision + Recall}
$$

Note the addition of what is known as the `beta` parameter in the F0.5 and F2 scores, which is used to control the relative weight of precision and recall.
We do not discuss these variants in significant detail here, but [this article](https://machinelearningmastery.com/fbeta-measure-for-machine-learning/) provides a helpful introduction to the various scores, how to derive them, and shows how to use them in practice with code examples in Python.

<!-- end admonition -->

---

So far, we have been treating our sample of patients as a homogeneous group.
That is, we haven't considered whether there are different subgroups of patients that can be identified based on relevant characteristics (e.g. age, sex, race, etc.).
This is a big gap from the perspective of fairness, but addressing it requires us to add some further complexity to our running example.

Therefore, let's assume that our 100 patients are now split according to their sex, and we have the following distribution.

<!-- insert appropriate graphic of people with 60 males and 40 females, no model overlay -->

With this update to our example, we need to return to our confusion matrix once more and consider how this new information alters our understanding of the performance of our model.
Let's pretend that the performance of our model is as follows:

<!-- male table -->
| | Predicted Positive | Predicted Negative | Class Total |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Actual Positive** | 10 | 10 | 20 |
| **Actual Negative** | 2 | 38 | 40 |

<!-- female table -->
| | Predicted Positive | Predicted Negative | Class Total
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Actual Positive** | 7 | 6 | 13 |
| **Actual Negative** | 22 | 5 | 27 |

Again, we can represent this visually:

<!-- insert appropriate graphic of people with 60 males and 40 females -->

Let's now calculate some of the performance metrics for these two confusion matrices and show them side by side:

| Metric | Male | Female |
| --- | --- | --- |
| True Positive Rate (`TP` / `P`) | 0.5 | 0.5 |
| False Positive Rate (`FP` / `N`) | 0.05 | 0.8 |
| True Negative Rate (`TN` / `N`) | 0.95 | 0.2 |
| False Negative Rate (`FN` / `P`) | 0.5 | 0.5 |
| Accuracy ((`TP` + `TN`) / (`P` + `N`))| 0.8 | 0.3 |
| Precision (`TP` / (`TP` + `FP`)) | 0.8 | 0.24 |
| Recall (`TP` / (`TP` + `FN`)) | 0.5 | 0.5 |

As you can see, there is variation in the performance of our model across the two subgroups in a number of categories.
Although `recall` is the same for the two groups, the `accuracy` and `precision` of the models differ significantly because of the higher number of false positives for females.

Translated into practical terms, this means our current model will be failing to identify a large number of female patients who need to be sent for further tests or treatment.

What can we do about this?

----

A few options include:

- Collecting more data and improving the representativeness of the dataset to see if we can reduce the class imbalance
- Altering the decision threshold for the model to see if the precision-recall trade-off can be improved, perhaps by using the F-score as a guide
- Oversampling from the minority group to rebalance the classes

There are myriad pros and cons to these approaches.
But before we even consider such approaches, we need to touch upon another important statistical fairness issue: the base-rate.

#### Statistical Fairness Issue #3: Variation in Base Rate

First, the `base rate` is just the number of positive cases divided by the total number of cases ($BR = P/P+N$).
In the previous example, the `base rate` was the same for both subgroups.
But this is often not the case in real-world datasets, especially in healthcare where the prevalence of a disease can vary drastically between different subgroups (e.g. affecting elderly patients more than young patients).

So, let's now change the `base rate` and review how this affects our model.

<!-- male table -->
| | Predicted Positive | Predicted Negative | Class Total |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Actual Positive** | 10 | 10 | 20 |
| **Actual Negative** | 2 | 38 | 40 |

<!-- female table -->
| | Predicted Positive | Predicted Negative | Class Total
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| **Actual Positive** | 18 | 9 | 27 |
| **Actual Negative** | 11 | 2 | 13 |

Let's now calculate some of the performance metrics for these two confusion matrices and show them side by side:

| Metric | Male | Female |
| --- | --- | --- |
| Base Rate (`P` / `P` + `N`) | 0.33 | 0.68 |
| True Positive Rate (`TP` / `P`) | 0.5 | 0.67 |
| False Positive Rate (`FP` / `N`) | 0.05 | 0.85 |
| True Negative Rate (`TN` / `N`) | 0.95 | 0.15 |
| False Negative Rate (`FN` / `P`) | 0.5 | 0.33 |
| Accuracy ((`TP` + `TN`) / (`P` + `N`))| 0.8 | 0.5 |
| Precision (`TP` / (`TP` + `FP`)) | 0.8 | 0.62 |
| Recall (`TP` / (`TP` + `FN`)) | 0.5 | 0.67 |

So, now we have a situation where the likelihood of having the disease is higher for females (i.e. a base rate of 0.68 for females and a base rate of 0.33 for males), and they are under-represented in our dataset.
And, although there is an improvement from the previous set of metrics, this hypothetical model still has higher levels of performance for males who are over-represented in the dataset and less likely to have the disease.

Intuitively, this is not a fair model.
But can we be more precise in saying how?

A first pass would appeal to moral and legalistic notions of non-discrimination and equality.
We have not spoken about which features our model is using in this running example, but let's pretend that the project team did not collect any data on the sex of the patients.

Perhaps, they were motivated by a conception of fairness-as-blindness, where the model should not be able to discriminate against any protected characteristic.
However, despite not collecting the data, the model still ended up discriminating against female patients.

In legal terms, this would be an instance of 'indirect discrimination', which means that some rule, policy, practice, or in this case an 'algorithm', appears to be neutral with respect to how it treats different groups, but has a disproportionate impact on a protected group.

<!-- begin admonition -->

As defined in the UK's Equality Act 2010[^ukgov], it is against the law to discriminate against anyone because of the following protected characteristics:

- age
- gender reassignment
- being married or in a civil partnership
- being pregnant or on maternity leave
- disability
- race including colour, nationality, ethnic or national origin
- religion or belief
- sex
- sexual orientation

When we refer to a 'protected group', we are referring to a group whose members share one of these characteristic.

<!-- end admonition -->

The notion of a protected characteristic is a helpful one in FairML, because it allows us to bring additional precision to our discussion and helps us identify different types of fairness (and unfairness) as we will see in the next section.

However, it is not without it's problems.

For instance, poverty is not a protected characteristic in the UK, but it is a well-known predictor of poor health outcomes.
As such, if a model is trained on data that includes a proxy for poverty (e.g. the area in which a patient lives), it may end up discriminating against patients from poorer areas, but there would be little legal recourse for the patients to seek redress.

Therefore, although we will refer to 'protected characteristics' in the remainder of this discussion, it is worth keeping in mind whether the moral scope of this term is adequately captured by the legal definitions.

### Statistical Fairness Definitions

If we are to choose responsible methods for addressing inequalities in model performance, such as the ones we have just discussed, we need to be able to precisely identify how and where the model is failing to be fair.

Let's define a few key variables to help us with this task:

- $Y$ is the *outcome* variable, which is the variable we are trying to predict.
- $\hat{Y}$ is the *prediction* of the model.
- $A$ is the *protected characteristic*.

There are three widely used formal criteria of *non-discrimination* that all bear on the relationship between the model's performance across sub-groups.
They help us formally define a variety of 'group-level' fairness criteria, which we can then use to determine targets for our model to achieve or constraints to impose during the development of the model.

The three criteria can be described formally and intuitively as follows:

- Independence:
  - Formal: $A$ is *unconditionally* independent of the model's predictions $\hat{Y}$
  - Intuition: the outcome of a model's predictions should be the same for all individuals, regardless of their membership in a protected group
- Separation:
  - Formal: $A$ is *conditionally* independent of the model's predictions $\hat{Y}$, given the true outcome $Y$
  - Intuition: the proportion of correct predictions are equal across groups, (e.g a male and female who have the disease are equally likely to be correctly predicted as having the disease)
- Sufficiency:
  - Formal: $A$ is *conditionally* independent of the true outcome $Y$, given the model's predictions $\hat{Y}$
  - Intuition: 

Starting with independence, we can see the immediate appeal of this criterion: all groups have an equal opportunity to be predicted correctly.
But, as we have already seen this is unrealistic when, for instance, the base rate of a disease is different across groups.

And, in cases where 


### The Fairness Compass: A Tool for Choosing Fairness Criteria

Group-level fairness only provides assurance that the average member of a (protected, marginalsied or vulnerable) group will be treated fairly. No guarantees are provided to individuals.

---

## Unused Resources

- A statistic is defined as sufficient if it cannot be replaced with another statistic derived from the same sample, such that the replacement provides any additional information regarding the parameter in question.
- Problems of defining fairness across individual and group level categories
    - Fair when considered as an inividual level, but due to historical factors baseline rates of reoffence are different across black and white defendants (i.e. black people are more likely to be arrested in the US due to systemic racism).
    - It is not possible to be fair to individuals and groups at the same time.
- Obermeyer et al. (2019) example of algorithm that contained racial bias due to using predicted health care cost as proxy for how sick an individual was. However, due to systemic barriers to accessing healthcare, or implicit biases of healthcare professionals, Black individuals were treated unfairyly. Only 17.7% of patients that the algorityn assisgned to receive extra care were Black.
    - Other examples: 
        - Women are less like to be shown ads for high paid positions like CEO or CFO (Datta et al. 2015)
        - Black women are less likely to be inaccurately classified by facial recognition systems (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018)
- > "One danger of the machine learning approach is that it leads to a narrow focus on the accuracy of the prediction. In other words, “good” decisions are those that accurately predict the target. But decision making might be “good” for other reasons: [...]] considering only relevant factors (in a sense we’ll discuss below), considering the full set of relevant factors, incorporating other normative principles (e.g., need, desert, etc.), or allowing people to understand and potentially contest the policy. Even a decision making process that is not terribly accurate might be seen as good if it has some of these other properties." (Barocas et al. 2019)

---

[^allure]: (add citation) https://onezero.medium.com/the-seductive-diversion-of-solving-bias-in-artificial-intelligence-890df5e5ef53
[^practicalfairness]: O'reilly book on practical fairness (Aileen Nielsen)
[^ruf]: Ruf, B., & Detyniecki, M. (2021). Towards the Right Kind of Fairness in AI. https://axa-rev-research.github.io/static/AXA_FairnessCompass-English.pdf
[^ukgov]: https://www.gov.uk/discrimination-your-rights
