# Engage Inclusively

We just focused on how teams can actively practie inward-facing processes of reflection on the power dynamics, positionality, and the purpose of the projects they are working on. In this section we will focus on how practices of outward-facing stakeholder engagement and community involvement can bolster a project’s legitimacy, social license, and democratic governance as well as ensure that its outputs will possess an appropriate degree of public accountability and transparency. 

A diligent stakeholder engagement process can help teams to identify stakeholder salience, undertake team positionality reflection, and facilitate proportionate community involvement and input throughout the research project workflow. This process can also safeguard the equity and the contextual accuracy of impact assessments and facilitate appropriate end-to-end processes of transparent project governance by supporting their iterative revisitation and re-evaluation.


<!-- "While practices of inward-facing reflection on purposes, positionality, and power can strengthen the reflexivity, objectivity, and reasonableness of CSS research activities (D’Ignazio and Klein, 2020; Haraway, 1988; Harding, 1992, 1995, 2008, 2015), practices of outward-facing stakeholder engagement and community involvement can bolster a research project’s legitimacy, social license, and democratic governance as well as ensure that its outputs will possess an appropriate degree of public accountability and transparency. A diligent stakeholder engagement process can help research teams to identify stakeholder salience, undertake team positionality reflection, and facilitate proportionate community involvement and input throughout the research project workflow. This process can also safeguard the equity and the contextual accuracy of impact assessments and facilitate appropriate end-to-end processes of transparent project governance by supporting their iterative revisitation and re-evaluation. Moreover, community-involving engagement processes can empower the public and the CSS community alike by introducing the transformative agency of “citizen science” into research processes  (Albert et al., 2021; Sagarra et al., 2016; Tauginienė et al., 2020). -->

It is important to note, however, that all stakeholder engagement processes can run the risk either of being cosmetic or tokenistic tools employed to legitimate projects without substantial and meaningful participation or of being insufficiently participatory, i.e., of being one-way information flows or nudging exercises that serve as public relations instruments (Arnstein, 1969; Tritter and McCallum, 2006 CITE). To avoid such hazards of superficiality, team members should shore up a proportionate approach to stakeholder engagement through deliberate and precise goal setting. 

The objectives of engagement that your research team chooses will depend on factors that divide into four categories:

!!! abstract "Factors that affect stakeholder engagement objective"
    1. Assessment of risks of adverse impacts: Stakeholder involvement in CSS research projects should be proportionate to the scope of their potential risks and hazards.

    2. Assessment of positionality: Stakeholder involvement should address positionality limitations. For instance, in cases where the identity characteristics of research team members do not sufficiently reflect or represent significantly impacted groups, stakeholder participation can “fill gaps” in knowledge, domain expertise, and lived experience.

    3. Assessment of project needs: Stakeholder involvement should help team members strengthen their ability to frame research questions and to tackle research problems. Team members should explore the optimal means for community members to actively contribute to their practices. 

    4. Establishment of stakeholder engagement goals: Researchers should determine engagement objectives that enable the appropriate degree of stakeholder engagement and co-production in project design, evaluation, and oversight processes. This can be done by careful selection of participation goals from a spectrum of engagement options (informing, partnering, consulting, empowering) that equip a project with a level of engagement which meets team-based assessments of risk, research need, and positionality.





Researchers and developers may face practical challenges when drawing on these four factors to operationalise a stakeholder engagement process. For example, limits on available resources and tight timelines could be at cross-purposes with the degree of stakeholder involvement that is recommended by team-based assessments of research needs, potential hazards, and positionality limitations. Likewise, the chosen degree of appropriate public participation may be unrealistic or out-of-reach given the engagement barriers that arise from constraints on the capacity of vulnerable stakeholder groups to participate, difficulties in reaching marginalised, isolated, or socially excluded groups, and challenges to participation that are presented by digital divides or information and communication gaps between research organisations and impacted communities. In these instances, research teams should take a deliberate and reflective approach to deciding on how to balance engagement goals with practical considerations and should, at all events, make explicit the rationale behind their choices and document this. 

Regardless of any potential trade-offs, researchers should prioritise the establishment of clear and explicit stakeholder engagement goals. Relevant questions to pose in establishing these goals include: Why are we engaging with stakeholders? What do we envision the ideal purpose and the expected outcomes of engagement activities to be? How can we best drawn on the insights and lived experience of participants to inform and shape our research?  To answer these questions with sufficient specificity, researchers should refer the spectrum of engagement options, keeping in mind the both engagement goals and practical constraints (Fig. 2):