---
slideOptions:
  transition: slide
  spotlight:
    enabled: true
---

# Fairness (Section 1): What is Fairness?

> **Note**
> The following sections are part of this module:
>
> - Section 1: [What is Fairness?](rri-203-1.md)
> - Section 2: [Sociocultural Fairness](rri-203-2.md)
> - Section 3: [Statistical Fairness](rri-203-3.md)
> - Section 4: [Practical Fairness](rri-203-4.md)

---

> **Note for Index Page**
> This module is not a technical introduction to Fair ML methods, nor does it attempt to provide an up-to-date overview of the current methods in the field.
> New methods are currently being developed at a rapid pace, and many of these methods are designed to solve problems with specific techniques (e.g. privacy-preserving federated learning to protect interest of vulnerable groups).
> It is not possible, nor desirable, to keep these resources up-to-date with these sorts of developments.
> Rather, we aim to provide clarity on the practical and ethical consequences of fairness in data-driven technologies.
> As such, we discuss those methods (or classes of methods) that are well established and have wide applicability across domains and use cases.

---

## The Children and the Flute: An Example of Value Pluralism

Three children are arguing about which of them should have a flute.

- Anne claims the flute should belong to her on the grounds that she is the *only one who can play the flute*.
- Bob claims the flute should belong to him on the grounds that he is the *only one among the three who is so poor that he has no toys*.
- Carla claims the flute should belong to her on the grounds that she was *the one who made the flute*.

None of the children deny the claims of the others.

<!-- admonition reflective question -->

Is it fair to give the flute to Anne, Bob, or Carla?

<!-- end admonition -->

----

The story of the children and the flute is proposed by Amartya Sen, in his seminal work The Idea of Justice[^sen].
It is designed as a way to test our intuitions about how to reconcile incommensurable values, when evaluating fairness claims on the basis of their respective merits.
In the story, the three children represent competing theories of fairness that emphasise different values.

- Anne represents *utlitarian* theories of fairness (e.g. fairness involves maximising the overall welfare of the group)
- Bob represents *economic egalitarian* theories of fairness (e.g. fairness involves ensuring equal distribution of goods)
- Carla represents *libertarian* theories of fairness (e.g. fairness involves freedom to pursue one's own interests and benefit from one's own efforts)

While the values expressed by these theories do not always have to come into conflict, the purpose of Sen's example is to present a toy example of how and where they can.

----

This module is not about incommensurable values or value pluralism.
However, it is about how to manage and address sometimes competing claims of fairness in the context of data-driven technologies.
As such, Sen's example provides a useful bookend and a reminder that fairness is not a single, objective concept, but rather a process of evaluating various claims and reasons on the basis of their respective merits, and in a way that strives to ensure all voices (and values) are heard and included.

---

## Defining Fairness

Given the previous example, you will find it unsurprising that this module will not attempt to define fairness in the traditional way.
Rather, it will explore different facets of the concept, how they relate to each other, and most importantly how they can be practically applied to the design, development, and deployment of data-driven technologies.

In doing so, we will appeal to a variety of interrelated theories and concepts, including:

- Legal concepts of non-discrimination and equality
- Moral concepts of social justice and distributive justice
- Practical forms of bias mitigation and statistical fairness
- Social concepts of diversity, inclusion, and representation

In doing so, we will strive to identify common (or, underlying) themes that can be used to operationalise and proceduralise fairness in the context of data-driven technologies.

<!-- being admonition -->
**Clarification**

It is important to note that this module is not a summary of or introduction to any of these areas.
Therefore, while we will strive to make explicit where specific concepts are drawn from (e.g. legal versus moral literature), it is important to note that many of the concepts are inherently multi-disciplinary and interrelated.

<!-- end admonition -->

Let's start by looking at some questions that span the different perspective outlined above.

----

## Questions of Fairness (1): Procedures

Here are three questions that all relate to fair procedures:

1. Who should get what?
2. How should we decide?
3. Who decides?

These three questions are related.
The first question relates to the challenges of deciding how to *allocate* or *distribute* goods.
For instance, who should be granted a mortgage?
And, which factors a relevant to the way we carve up different groups (e.g. those eligible and those ineligible)?
The second question then relates to the decision procedures (or rules) we use to actually allocate or distribute goods.
For instance, will different groups be offered different mortgage rates?
If so, what will influence this decision (e.g. will weights be applied to the previous set of factors)?
And, the third question relates to the authority of the decision procedure.
That is, who is designing and implementing the decision procedure, and what provides them with the authority (or, legitimacy) to do so?

To give one example, perhaps senior decision-makers for a national department of health and social care are trying to decide how to allocated limited resources for accessing counselling services.
They start by deciding that the services should be allocated to those who are most in need.
However, they then realise that they do not have a clear definition of what "most in need" means.
As such, they reach out to a group of stakeholders (e.g. patients, clinicians, and researchers) to help them define the criteria for eligibility.

Here, the procedures for answering each of the above questions is inclusive and aims to uphold values such as democratic forms of deliberation.
But whether the procedures will a) maximise the overall welfare of the group, b) ensure equal distribution of goods, or c) allow people to pursue their own interests and benefit from their own efforts, is not directly addressed.

So, we can now see that the underlying values that characterise fairness can be separated from the procedures used to achieve them.

<!-- admonition info -->
**What is a good?**
As we use the term in this module, a good is anything that is valued by a person or a group of people.
This can be some resource (e.g. money, food, water), a service (e.g. healthcare, education, housing), an outcome (e.g. improved mobility, winning the lottery), or a status (e.g. power, prestige, respect).
It is important to note that a good can be both tangible and intangible, and, therefore, is intentionally an ambiguous term.
<!-- end admonition -->

---

## Questions of Fairness (2): Outcomes, Comparisons, and Trade-Offs

In addition to the previous questions, there are also questions that help us identify which elements are responsible for any comparisons and trade-offs between outcomes. For example:

1) Is a system that gives everyone an equal opportunity fairer than one that ensures everyone has an equal outcome?
2) Is an algorithm that follows consistent and impartial logic fairer than a human that shows empathy and compassion?
3) Is it fairer to use a more accurate model, which is complex and opaque in its workings, than a less accurate but interpretable model?

Answering questions such as these may involve both the identification and evaluation of competing values that pertain to specific outcomes, as well as the different decision procedures employed.

When we ask questions such as these, or the previous ones, it is important to be clear on our target.
Is our question focused on a comparison of different values?
Is our question seeking to clarify whether a decision procedure is legitimate, or is it trying to determine if it is effective in realising some pre-determined outcome?
Or, is our question seeking to clarify the reasons that are relevant to resolving some trade-off?

Until we can be clear on what question we are asking, it is unlikely we will be able to agree on an answer or even be sure that we are disagreeing on the same thing.
Over the course of this module we will slowly build up our conceptual vocabulary to develop both a shared understanding of the different questions that can be asked, as well as the different answers that can be given.

We have already started this process, but let's now turn to the first set of conceptual distinctions that directly address data-driven technologies.

---

## Conceptual Matters (1): Three Perspectives on Fairness

There are three perspectives on fairness that we will use throughout this module to help us emphasise different features of data-driven technologies that relate to matters of fairness.
By "perspective" we wish to draw attention to the fact that each of the three has some viewpoint or stance on the above questions, but that no single perspective will be able to capture everything that matters about fairness.
Rather, an inclusive and diverse set of backgrounds and people will be required to ensure that the different perspectives are well represented and that all considerations have been taken into account.

<!-- start admonition -->
There are many ways that we could have defined or labelled these perspectives.
The perspectives we have chosen were selected to achieve a balance between a) maximising applicability across different domains while b) minimising the number of categories.
In other courses, we expand this set where finer distinctions are required or where different perspectives are more relevant.
However, as this module is primarily practical in its focus, the following categories are appropriate for the objectives defined at the start of the skills track.
<!-- end admonition -->

---- 

### Sociocultural Fairness

Sociocultural fairness emphasises the importance of the social and cultural context in which a data-driven technology is developed, deployed, and used.
Adopting this perspective helps us to consider the ways in which different groups or communities may be impacted by a technology, whether the implementation of a system into a particular context is appropriate, and whether the technology is being used in a way that is consistent with the values of the community.

Addressing questions about sociocultural issues typically requires a deep understanding of the historical and current practices and dynamics of the society or community in question.

<!-- insert illustrative partial -->

---- 

### Statistical Fairness

As a module on data-driven technologies, especially those that can be described as "algorithmic" or "autonomous", statistical fairness is a vital perspective to adopt.
This perspective focuses on the statistical properties of the data-driven technology in question, including properties of the data used to develop the system, the metrics chosen to evaluate its performance, as well as formal ways of representing the sociocultural context in which the technology is deployed.

Addressing questions about statistical fairness typically requires high levels of technical expertise and familiarity with up-to-date statistical techniques and concepts.

<!-- insert illustrative partial -->

---
### Practical Fairness

Practical fairness relates to those decisions and actions that are made or enacted during the design, development, and deployment of a data-driven technology.
As we will see, many decisions made during the governance of a project can seem innocuous at first glance, but can have a significant impact on the practical fairness of the technology.

Addressing questions about practical fairness often requires both a high-level understanding of how a project is governed, as well as the broader ecosystem in which it is carried out (e.g. regulatory frameworks, team dynamics, industry standards, etc.).

<!-- insert illustrative partial -->

---- 


## Conceptual Matters (2): Equality and Equity

Before we end this section, we should also address another (smaller) conceptual distinction: the difference between equality and equity.

Fairness is often spoken of in connection with these two neighbouring concepts.
And, while related, they are not synonymous.
As we will see, in some cases equality or equity may not even be desirable goals to pursue in the context of a particular project.
And, if equality was our only goal, we would not be as interested in FairML as we are, because we would be able to use simpler algorithms that just automate our chosen procedural rules and treat everyone the same.

<!-- start admonition -->
**Equal Rights**
While moral and legal concepts, such as universal human rights, ascribe some *fundamental notion* of equality to all people, at a practical level the idea of equality rarely goes very far as most people are not equal in a whole variety of ways.
As such, it is often not a good idea to treat people *equally* except in rare cases (e.g. sports or talent competitions).
This is why we often speak of "equal opportunity" rather than "equal outcomes".
<!-- end admonition -->

For now, let's put these issues aside and just define the two concepts as follows:

- Equality is when *all people are treated the same*, regardless of any relevant differences in characteristics (e.g. age, sex, religious beliefs).
- Equity is where *people are treated differently* based on what they deserve, which will vary between contexts.

Both require us to define key metrics.

- Equality requires us to define what counts as "the same" in terms of procedural rules or decisions.
- Equity requires us to determine how to measure what people "deserve".

And, both decisions connect us back to our three procedural rules from earlier (e.g. who gets to decide on what people deserve), as well as the possible trade-offs and comparisons between relevant values (e.g. whether all stakeholders agree about whether a person is deserving of a particular outcome, and how desirable the outcome may be).

---

If you are feeling a bit overwhelmed by all of this, please don't worry.
Understanding fairness is challenging, as it requires a deep understanding of a wide network of concepts and a practical grasp on how to move around this network in a dynamic but purposeful way—this is where our three perspectives will come in handy, as they will help us focus on which part of the network is most relevant or salient to our concerns.
To help you develop this ability, we will be returning to these concepts a lot throughout this module and anchoring them in concrete and illustrative examples.
Doing so will allow you to build up a more intuitive understanding of the concepts, and how they relate to each other.

In the next section we are going to start to build up our conceptual vocabulary by introducing the first of our three perspectives: sociocultural fairness.

[^sen]: Sen, A. (2009). The Idea of Justice. Penguin, United Kingdom.
