---
slideOptions:
  transition: slide
  spotlight:
    enabled: true
---

# Explainability (Section 1): What is Explainability?

> **Note**
> The following sections are part of this module:
>
> - Section 1: [What is Explainability?](rri-203-1.md)
> - Section 2: [Project Transparency](rri-203-2.md)
> - Section 3: [Model Interpretability](rri-203-3.md)
> - Section 4: [Situating Explanations](rri-203-4.md)

---

> **Note for Index Page**
> This module is not a technical introduction to Interepretable ML methods, nor does it attempt to provide an up-to-date overview of the current methods in Interpretable ML or Explainable AI.
> New methods are currently being developed at a rapid pace, and many of these methods are designed to solve problems with specific techniques (e.g. integrated gradients and feature relevance for classificatory models).
> It is not possible, nor desirable, to keep these resources up-to-date with these sorts of developments.
> Rather, we aim to provide clarity on the practical and ethical consequences of explainability in data-driven technologies.
> As such, we discuss those methods (or classes of methods) that are well established and have wide applicability across domains and use cases.

---

When digital artist Jason M. Allen of Pueblo West, Colorado created this image—titled, 'Théâtre D’opéra Spatial'—and entered it into the Colorado State Fair's annual art competition he caused a controversy.
The admittedly captivating image was in one sense of the term "created" by Mr. Alle, but not with the traditional software tools of a digital artist.
Instead, all it took for Mr. Allen to create this image was a single text prompt used as input for a generative AI model known as Midjourney.

Whereas digital art, like its more messy and organic counterpart, requires hours of painstaking work, works of art like the one above can be created in a matter of second, using carefully chosen prompt such as the following:

` /imagine prompt: unexplainable AI, surrealism style`

The results are often stunning, as is the case with 'Théâtre D’opéra Spatial', and not so much with the result of the much simpler prompt above:

But unlike the appealing and engaging mystery that lies behind the creation of traditional works of art, which mesmerise and captivate so many people, the primary mystery behind AI-created artwork is the fact that no one has any idea how the models actually work!

----

When Mr. Allen entered his image, the public response was mixed.
Notably, other artists whose livelihoods and welfare depend, in part, on the public valuing and appreciating the fruits of their labour were anxious and angry about the widespread adoption of AI-generated art.

## Types of Explainability