---
slideOptions:
  transition: slide
  spotlight:
    enabled: true
---

# What is Responsible Research and Innovation? (Section 3) Defining Responsible Research and Innovation

> **Note**
> The following sections are part of this module:
>
> - Section 1: [Understanding Responsibility](rri-100-1.md)
> - Section 2: [Collective and Distributed Responsibility](rri-100-2.md)
> - Section 3: [Defining Responsible Research and Innovation](rri-100-3.md)
> - Section 4: [The Scope and Horizon of Responsibility](rri-100-4.md)

---

## An Incomplete History of the term 'Responsible Research and Innovation'

The term 'responsible research and innovation' is strongly associated with the [European Commission's Framework Programmes for Research and Technological Development](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Framework_Programmes_for_Research_and_Technological_Development)—a set of funding programmes that support research in the European Union.[^sts]

----

Beginning with the seventh framework programme in 2010, and continuing on through Horizon 2020 (FP8), the term 'responsible research and innovation' became increasingly important for the European Commission's policy.

----

The importance for policy-makers, as well as researchers and innovators, is captured nicely in the following definition:

> “Responsible Research and Innovation is a transparent, interactive process by which societal actors and innovators become mutually responsive to each other with a view on the (ethical) acceptability, sustainability and societal desirability of the innovation process and its marketable products (in order to allow a proper embedding of scientific and technological advances in our society).”[@vonschomberg2011]

You can clearly see a strong emphasis on societal embedding and social context (e.g. imnvolvement of members of the public in discussions about scientific and technological advances).

> An emphasis on societal impact and social context will be a reccurring theme throughout this module, and associated modules. 
<!-- convert to admonition -->

----

Since the European Commission's initiative, other national funding bodies have also shown a commitment to RRI.
For example, in the United Kingdom, the UKRI's Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council have developed the AREA framework, which sets out four principles for RRI: Anticipate, Reflect, Engage, and Act (AREA).

---

## The AREA Framework

The AREA framework is a principles-based framework. That is, the framework comprises four principles that serve to operationalise the term 'responsible research and innovation', while also providing high-level guidance on practical decision-making.

<!-- Add admonition or tooltip to define 'operationalise': 

The term 'operationalise' (or, operationalisation), in the context of principles, means to further sefine or specify the principle in actionable or measurable terms so that it can be implemented and evaluated in practice (e.g. during a project). This typically involves creating a set of rules, procedures, or guidelines for how the principle should be applied in a particular context. 

For example, in a data science project involving sensitive information, the principle 'protect user data and safeguard privacy' (summarised as 'data privacy') may be operationalised through adherence to the following procedures:

- Identify what data is considered sensitive and requires extra protection
- Obtain explicit consent from individuals before collecting or using their sensitive data
- Regularly review and update the data protection measures in place
- Provide individuals with the means to access, correct or delete their personal data
- Establish procedures for reporting and investigating any data breaches
- Provide training to employees on data protection and privacy practices.

This list could be extended as required by the specific context of the project.
-->

----

### Anticipate

----

### Reflect

----

### Engage

----

### Act

----

### CARE and Act

<!-- Add a note about the extension of this framework but link to AEG skills track. -->

---

## Science, Technology, and Society

In almost all cases, two significant and motivating drivers behind these policies and principles are (a) an awareness of the impact that science and technology can have on society, and (b) an appreciation of the need to include the public in a dialogue about how science and technology should shape society.
The following three case studies help to provide illustrations of these points, while also serving as useful examples that will be returned to in subsequent discussions.

[^sts]: There is also a strong connection to science and technologie studies, which we discuss futher in a [separate module](#).