---
slideOptions:
  transition: slide
  spotlight:
    enabled: true
---

# Fairness (Section 2): Sociocultural Fairness

> **Note**
> The following sections are part of this module:
>
> - Section 1: [What is Fairness?](rri-203-1.md)
> - Section 2: [Sociocultural Fairness](rri-203-2.md)
> - Section 3: [Statistical Fairness](rri-203-3.md)
> - Section 4: [Practical Fairness](rri-203-4.md)

---

<!-- - Ghost labour for data curation, or gig economy work for ride-sharing (the new form of child labour that boosts productivity for the factory owners?) -->

Data-driven technologies are not designed, developed, or deployed in a vacuum.
Rather, they are embedded in a social and cultural context from which they cannot be isolated.

This section will explore how this sociocultural context of data-driven technologies affects the fairness of the technologies themselves.

---

## Levelling the Playing Field

Consider the following scenario.
You are organising a game of football with your friends against another team.
However, when you arrive on the day the teams are organised such that one team has access to the best players, the best equipment, and the highest level of fitness.
Furthermore, the football pitch is located in a field with an uneven surface, such that the gradient declines steeply towards your goal and the teams do not rotate the direction of play.

How would you feel about playing this game if you were on the team with the disadvantageous conditions?

----

Unless you like unreasonable challenges or find it fun to lose, you would probably not be very happy about this situation.
In fact you would probably feel that the game is unfair.
And, in arguing your case you would be able to point to several clear factors that make the game unfair:

- Variation in the levels of fitness between the teams
- Variation in the quality in the equipment
- Variation in the skills of the players
- An uneven playing field

----

Now, let's assume that the other team concedes to the (valid) reasons you have given for the game being unfair, and make certain concessions.
First, they ensure everyone has access to the same equipment.
Second, you all move to a different field with an even surface.

However, the composition of the teams remains the same.
After all, you came as a team and want to play together.
You go ahead with the game, and unsurprisingly, you lose.

----

In this toy example, some of the factors that contribute to the initial unfairness of the game are ones that can be easily resolved (e.g. access to equipment, uneven field).
But others remain harder to resolve, such as variation in skills.
Some would argue here that variation in skills and fitness is a natural part of the game, and that the game is fair in this sense once the other factors are resolved.

But what if we delve further into the historical factors behind this variation in skills and fitness?

Perhaps the other team come from a wealthy background, and have always been able to afford the best equipment and training facilities.
And, perhaps your team has a lower level of respiratory fitness, in part, because of high levels of pollution in the area where you live.

----

While the game is fairer in the adjusted scenario, it's still true to say that your team has been playing on an uneven field.
It's just that the field, here, is no longer the physical one; but a sociocultural one that spans back across many years.

In relation to data-driven technologies, sociocultural fairness is about identifying the factors (or, sociocultural determinants) that precede the choices made during a project's lifecycle but which affect the overall fairness of the technology.
In other words, before the game of the project lifecycle begins, how is the field already uneven and how can we level it to make sure that the game is fair?
And, once the game has finished, how do the results affect future games?

---- 

<!-- start admonition -->
**Stretching the Analogy**
This analogy is useful for thinking about the sociocultural determinants of fairness, and we will stretch it a little bit further in the following sections.
However, we should acknowledge at the outset that it will only get us so far.
Therefore, in the remainder of this section we will look at three examples of sociocultural fairness in data-driven technologies and try to extract generalisable factors that can be applied to other projects.

<!-- end admonition -->
---

### The Digital Divide

<!-- Who get's to play the game? -->

In our running analogy, one of the teams had access to better equipment and training facilities.
In the case of data-driven technologies, this would be referred to as a *digital divide*—a term that refers to the gap between those who have access to digital technologies and those who do not.

This divide can exist in many forms, including:

- Differential access to the internet (e.g. variation in speed and reliability, barriers from higher costs)
- Differential access to compute resources (e.g. faster processors, more memory, etc.)
- Variation in digital literacy and skills (e.g. ability to think critically about online content, ability to manipulate data)


---

### Ghost Labour

<!-- Who built the field? -->

---

### Representation

<!-- Which teams have the best marketing? -->

## Stakeholder Engagement

<!-- Explain how inclusive and diverse stakeholder engagement help address these issues in part, but that more is needed to improve accessibility for marginalised communities. -->